The first seminar will be held in Milan on 18/01/2018 at the Department of Psychology of the University of Milano-Bicocca. 

Edificio U6, Piazza dell'Ateneo Nuovo, 1, Milano, Italia

## Program

14.00 - 14.40: **The meaning of wug. A computational exploration into the comprehension of novel words (complex or not).** *Marco Marelli*, Department of Psychology, University of Milano-Bicocca.

14.40 - 15.00: **ARGO: Analogical Reasoning Game for purpOse.** *Francesco Barrera*, Department of Computer Science, University of Milano-Bicocca.

15.00 - 15.20: **Representation of Temporal Entities from Entity Embeddings.** *Federico Bianchi*, Department of Computer Science, University of Milano-Bicocca.

15.20 - 16.00: Discussion

## Abstracts of the Talks

### The meaning of wug. A computational exploration into the comprehension of novel words (complex or not). Marco Marelli

We learn new words almost on a daily basis: as adults, a new element is introduced in our vocabulary every other day. With new words, we also learn about new objects and ideas - this steady lexical learning seems to constitute a most important source of expansion for the semantic system. However, when we experience, as adults, a new word, its referent is not typically immediately available in the same context. How then can we comprehend novel words, simply on the basis of an unfamiliar sequence of sounds or graphical elements?

I will address this question in a computational framework that moves from the tenets of distributional semantics. Since the seminal LSA proposal, distributional semantics has provided efficient data-driven models of the human semantic system, representing word meaning through vectors recording lexical co-occurrences from large text corpora. However, vanilla distributional approaches generate static descriptions of the semantic system, falling short of capturing the highly dynamical interactions underlying novel word comprehension. In the present talk, I will introduce modelling developments that address this issue from different perspectives.

### ARGO: Analogical Reasoning Game for purpOse. Francesco Barrera

### Representation of Temporal Entities from Entity Embeddings. Federico Bianchi