The first seminar, *Meaning, Analogical Reasoning and Time* will be held in Milan on 09/11/2018 at the Department of Psychology of the University of Milano-Bicocca. 

Location U14, Room T014, Viale Sarca 336 - Milano, Italy.

## Program

14.30 - 15.15: **The meaning of wug. A computational exploration into the comprehension of novel words (complex or not).** *Marco Marelli*, Department of Psychology, University of Milano-Bicocca.

15.15 - 15.35: **ARGO: Analogical Reasoning Game for purpOse.** *Francesco Barrera*, Department of Computer Science, University of Milano-Bicocca.

15.35 - 15.55: **Representation of Temporal Entities from Entity Embeddings.** *Federico Bianchi*, Department of Computer Science, University of Milano-Bicocca.

15.55 - 16.30: Discussion

## Abstracts of the Talks

### The meaning of wug. A computational exploration into the comprehension of novel words (complex or not). Marco Marelli

We learn new words almost on a daily basis: as adults, a new element is introduced in our vocabulary every other day. With new words, we also learn about new objects and ideas - this steady lexical learning seems to constitute a most important source of expansion for the semantic system. However, when we experience, as adults, a new word, its referent is not typically immediately available in the same context. How then can we comprehend novel words, simply on the basis of an unfamiliar sequence of sounds or graphical elements?

I will address this question in a computational framework that moves from the tenets of distributional semantics. Since the seminal LSA proposal, distributional semantics has provided efficient data-driven models of the human semantic system, representing word meaning through vectors recording lexical co-occurrences from large text corpora. However, vanilla distributional approaches generate static descriptions of the semantic system, falling short of capturing the highly dynamical interactions underlying novel word comprehension. In the present talk, I will introduce modelling developments that address this issue from different perspectives.

### ARGO: Analogical Reasoning Game for purpOse. Francesco Barrera

Analogy are a well-know and well-studied method for analogical reasoning. In this seminar we present a web app that has been used to collect answers to analogy. The application considers analogies that contains entities coming from an encyclopedia (like Wikipedia) and is based on gamification methodologies to make the answering task engaging for users.

In the last part of this talk we will describe possible explanations for these analogies by looking at possible factors present in knowledge bases.

### Representation of Temporal Entities from Entity Embeddings. Federico Bianchi

Knowledge Graphs (KG) are widely used for knowledge representation. Recently, approaches aimed to represent the KG structure in an embedded space have become increasingly popular for their ability to capture high-level similarities between entities and relations. However, these embedded representations commonly give low consideration to the time aspect. Real-world entities exist and act in a defined temporal interval, consequently time is a valuable element of information in their description. 

In this presentation, we show the influence of time on the embedded representations of entities that are generated from text. The preliminary evaluation shows that generating a specific representation for temporal entities (e.g., years) can result in a more informative entity representation space. We also describe the time-aware similarity metric that can be used to evaluate the similarity between entities by either flattening their time distance or boosting it.